New York City has had its 311 non-emergency hotline since 2003. Since then, tens of millions of questions, complaints, and comments have been collected from residents.

To give you a sense of what that looks like, there were 2 million service requests made through 311 last year. This is the subset of 311 calls that identify geographically located problems, as opposed to requests for information or other help. These are the top thirty complaint categories. As you can see, the most common complaints are about heat and hot water, residential noise, and potholes. Rodents, that perennial New York problem, falls about twentieth at 30k complaints.

This data set has a very long tail, with a majority of the 200 categories holding under a thousand complaints. Insofar as this gives us a portrait of what New Yorkers are concerned about, sometimes it's more interesting to look at the other end of the spectrum: there were 10000 pieces of general advice for the mayor, 223 reports of non-beekeeper bee harborers, and 2 reports of illegal monkeys.

Because service requests are location-based, you can see exactly where those 2 monkeys were, and you can also see which neighborhoods generate the most complaints. Here is the geographic distribution of complaint rates, with Midtown being the clear outlier with 84 complaints per hundred residents. It's important to note that 311 doesn't collect information about the caller, so it's highly likely that Midtown complaints (which are mostly about noise, potholes, taxis, and meters) are coming from non-residents.

Okay, so putting these two things together, we can get geographic patterns of how people complain. I've clustered neighborhoods with similar complaint profiles, and once you map them, you can see that they tend to be spatially grouped together, suggesting that different areas have different needs and concerns. Given that noise and pothole complaints are ubiquitous, here are the more unique factors that differentiate concern clusters. For example, we have lower Manhattan with commercial and street noise and taxi complaints; outerlying areas with suburban problems like damaged trees; and heavily residential areas with housing complaints.

So the next step is to ask why we see variation in complaint rates across neighborhoods. There are two sets of factors that go into making a 311 call: the first is the caller's propensity to contact the government. Based on the literature on civic engagement, I've chosen some variables that try to capture a caller's willingness and ability to make a 311 call. The second, of course, is the reason a caller would need to make a call. So the idea here is that the condition of the neighborhood provokes calls for service. The data I've used to capture these variables is from the 2013 American Community Survey, administered by the Census Bureau, aggregated at the neighborhood level.

Given that different types of complaints may be reported at different rates, I look only at housing complaints, which as we saw before, were about things like heat and hot water, mold, and general residential building conditions. Overall this model performs quite well, capturing about 75% of the variation in the rate of 311 calls between neighborhoods. We can see some interesting correlations here: neighborhoods with higher minority populations tend to have lower contact rates, and neighborhoods with older housing stock and more vacant houses tend to have higher contact rates. The income variable is interesting, because while increases in median income are associated with a small, insignificant increase in contact rate, more households below poverty line has a big positive effect. This suggests that the barriers to entry are low - which is to say that 311 is easy to access and use - such that there is no income deterrent effect and that 311 service requests are strongly based in need. Finally, this set of variables is interesting because they try to capture the extent to which a resident has a "stake" in the neighborhood and thus feel invested in the area and motivated to request city services. So the more stable homeowners you have, the more calls you get.

So, taken as a whole, what can we do with this analysis? Again, we can break it down to the geographic unit and individual levels. Understanding the geographic distribution of service requests is key to public policy implementation. Given the model, city agencies can predict the rate at which types of complaints will be generated in each neighborhood and proactively address those issues. But we also have to remember that complaint reduction isn't necessarily the goal here, to the extent that underreporting can be a problem. If we have two neighborhoods with similar underlying infrastructure and conditions, why do we see differences in reporting rate between them? Do we see that certain groups systematically access city services less often than others? This could show city agencies where to concentrate outreach efforts to increase civic participation and to make sure every resident feels able to get city services when and where they need them.

Finally, if you would like to take a look at neighborhood complaint profiles yourself, I've made an interactive map that you can find at blah.
